---
layout: post
title: Mixed Up Text Messages
external-url:
categories: [sms, bugs]
---

Although text messaging (SMS) is currently the most popular and profitable means of mobile communication, it rather unfortunately seems that the technology is far from perfect. Despite the fact that the technology targeted at end-users has been embraced and improved upon for over a decade, many users are still experiencing frustrations stemming from the often ignored 160-character limit.

Once smartphones became popular, if not the leading type of phone used for text messaging, the majority of mobile customers were able to effectively forget about the 160-character limit due to both clever improvements in client-side programming and the adoption of the threaded conversation-view inbox. As a result, users with smartphones should never see character limit warnings or receive out-of-sync multi-part messages.

Still, every SMS message that exceeds 160 is treated in the same manner by carriers as originally devised. When a long text message is received, the SMS gateway divides the message into parts and then delivers the parts to the recipient. If the intended recipient has a smartphone, the parts are reassembled as one single message and appears as a new message in the user’s inbox. If the recipient does not have a smartphone, the messages are labeled (½), (2/2), (1/3),(2/3), etc., depending on the number of chunks it was divided into on the server.

Other issues arise for those with slightly more intelligent dumbphones. These phone attempt to take the load off of the SMS gateway by dividing long SMS messages into shorter chunks via client-side software. When messages exceed 380 characters (2 SMS messages) new problems come into play. Typically, these phones only split messages into two chunks. and if one is shorter than 160 characters (usually the final message part) it is delivered directly, while the larger part is processed in the gateway into another two chunks, each labeled (½),(2/2). This results in severely scrambled messages and makes for confusing conversation.

The multi-part messaging scheme sometimes causes more frustration for a small user base. Wireless customers have reported that when they sent a 160+ character message, the recipient may be shown the first chunk of the intended message concatenated with a second chunk of an old or deleted message, sometimes from a different contact.

Consider this story that happened to me this past Christmas. I sent my girlfriend a message at 5:30 in the morning detailing the dull events of the night before. The message she received was missing the final punctuation of my message, yet included additional text that discussed recent activity at a popular nightclub. She interpreted this as an implication that I had intended the text to be sent to another woman. My phone retained the original unaltered message that I had actually composed in the outbox, while hers displayed the incorrectly concatenated message that almost ended our relationship.

After we resolved our differences, I continued to research the issue and found dozens of similar reports from users. Every single one appeared to be unresolved, and the bug appeared to be platform independent. Wireless customers were posing questions in forums for [SonyEriccson](http://forums.hexus.net/mobile-devices-accessories/126411-problem-k750i-mixing-up-multi-part-text-messages.html), [Blackberry](http://forums.crackberry.com/blackberry-torch-9800-f209/phone-combining-new-sms-old-sms-579515/), [Android](http://forums.androidcentral.com/samsung-galaxy-s-ii/143306-long-text-messages-getting-mixed-up.html), [HP](http://www.sc-resources.net/threads/6387-SMS-getting-mixed-up), [Apple](https://discussions.apple.com/thread/3282171?start=0&amp;tstart=0), AT&amp;T, Verizon, [Google](http://code.google.com/p/android/issues/detail?id=17769), and various development sites. In each case, the sender retained the intended message while the recipient had received something with an old or deleted message part concatenated to the first. More often than not, the issue was posted by a [frantic boyfriend with an enraged or jealous girlfriend](http://talk.sonyericsson.com/message/91771#91771). The errors were not dependent on a single carrier or cellular technology; customers of both HSPA- and CDMA-based networks were reporting the same issues, sometimes across the same carriers, other times occurring during cross-carrier conversations. The only common factor seemed to be that the recipient was using a smartphone.

While no user reported any concrete solution offered by a cellular provider, hardware manufacturer or mobile operating system development team, some mobile technology gurus have offered some convincing explanations. The belief that I subscribe to involves the erroneous reconstruction of concatenated messages in conjunction with two or more corrupt contact entries in the recipients address book as hypothesized [here](http://www.droidforums.net/forum/tech-issues-bug-reports-suggestions/39318-long-received-sms-concatenation-bug.html#post517005).

I have serious doubts that this issue will get resolved, since it appears to be software-based and present in multiple operating systems. However, I have been upgraded to the iPhone this past holiday season and threw my LG ENV3 into the junk drawer. Apple’s new iMessages infrastructure seeks to circumvent carrier SMS gateways altogether whenever possible, although such privilege is limited to communications between devices running iOS 5 and above. RIM took a similar approach with the BBM network for Blackberry phones. The removal of the 160-character limit and the lift of SMS message tiered bundle pricing kept Research In Motion on top of the smartphone industry for years.

We can only hope that once dumbphones make their inevitable departure from the mobile marketplace they will take the aging SMS technology with them. In its wake we would ideally be presented with a unified cross-platform web-based messaging service tied to our cell phone numbers for the unbeatable price of free.